Statement by Anatoly Dyatlov on the Chernobyl nuclear disaster


(cca. 1994)


[This is a copy of a translation found in the comments of the video, as posted by user Alexey. I don't claim any rights except fair use for the purposes of research, nor responsibilities for the content or accuracy] 


https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IVthWR4cR1g


[Here is the translation of his story. I am sorry if there are any mistakes in technical terms... I'm a chemist, not a nuclear engineer... But I kept it as close as possible to what he was saying.] 
---
I am Dyatlov Anatoly Stepanovich, former deputy chief-engineer of the Chernobyl Nuclear Power Plant, of its operation. 


Let’s go back… to that… rather ill-fated day… of April 25th, 1986. 


I say April 25th because the shutdown of the fourth block for its maintenance began on April 25th. 


After we decreased the power and turned off one turbine, as we know, plant’s power supervisor forbade further decrease of power. It was at noon of April 25th. As always, we assumed that further plant power down would be allowed by evening, after peak evening power consumption hours. 


Since we still had unfinished scheduled works, the kind of works we’ve always had during block’s shutdown for its maintenance, and since I was at either block’s control room or at the block itself nearly every time during either full or temporary block’s shutdown, from its beginning to its end… in this case, due to a holdup, I went home for a short after-lunch nap and I asked operating personnel to let me know when further power down would be allowed. 


I slept for about 2-3 hours, after which, at about 10 pm, I was called from the block and informed that further power down has been allowed. So, I returned to the block. By 11 pm I reached block’s control room when reactor’s power was at about 50%, and about 11 pm the power down was continued. 


I spoke to Yuri Treguba, head of a previous shift. I spoke to Sasha Akimov, head of a midnight shift. All questions were clear for them, both for Treguba and Akimov. We didn’t have any other procedures left by that time, we only needed to decrease the power, power down a turbine, measure its vibrations during power down, because vibration levels were high on turbine 8 so we needed to calibrate this one. 


Then we needed to measure - or conduct an experiment on - turbo generator’s rundown and self-sustaining powering of a mechanism during design-basis breakdown scenario (annotation: a kind of breakdown that leads to the highest degree of consequences). This was supposed to be a kind of experiment that had to be done prior to firing up of the power block. It had not been done during power block launch. Then in 1984-1985 an experiment was conducted which showed unsatisfactory results of voltage drop rate, which is why it had to be revisited during block’s generator power-up stage. So, after these experiments had been conducted on power block 3 and 4 in 1985, during no-load running, an experiment was scheduled that was as close to real operating conditions as possible. 


It was necessary to do it, and it was always done, because it was a part of a system’s project. 


It must be said in advance that this experiment has no relation to the accident. It was simply connected to the accident by unscrupulous investigators of this accident, while all this happened as a result of unsatisfactory features of the reactor, which were not fully known at that time. And the accident itself - it cannot be called accident really… it’s a catastrophe… - which was unimaginable, could happen during carrying out of any other procedure. By no means as a result of the conducted experiment. It happened during the experiment, but not because of it. The experiment’s procedure had been rather competently written, meaningfully, we had discussed it several times, and it had been discussed before more than once. There were practically no remarks about it, even though it has been under close scrutiny of a large number of specialists. But none of them has remarked anything substantial about it. All of them were farfetched. Especially, because they said that this procedure didn’t account for safety measures. This is wrong. If you look at the procedure, it clearly states all safety measures, including switching power in electric circuits and others. But I want to say that this procedure had no connection to the accident. 


Consequently, I left block’s control room to walk around the complex. Not just because, but to observe the most interesting for me places right before the power down, because usually some defects appear during change of operating mode. From one side, they appear more frequently. From another, when parameters – temperature, pressure – are at their maximum, while power is decreased, you can inspect everything more carefully in those rooms where radiation situation is very unfavourable. 


About 00:30 I returned to block’s control room, and right from the door I saw several people gathered by the reactor’s control panel – reactor operator Toptunov himself, Akimov Sasha, as well as reactor operator alternates Kudryavcev, Proskuryakov, may be somebody else, but I don’t remember. I came to the panel and saw reactor’s power to be at 50-70 MW (megawatt). I asked Sasha Akimov why the power was so low. “During changing of automatic regulator the power dropped to 30 MW” – He said. It wasn’t that suspicious – there are no reactors which power level would not drop for one reason or another, there are no operators whose power readings would not unexplainably drop for one reason or another. It was a rather ordinary situation, so it didn’t alarm me in any way, and I allowed to continue increasing power level. Then I stepped away to talk to Mitlenko, chief of turbo generator’s rundown technical program, to check its readiness.


We are blamed for mistakenly elevating power levels of reactor after this drop. There was no violation. All of it was according to regulations. Yes, without a doubt, power level drop had a negative effect. But only for such reactor that has been constructed with such great deviations from construction regulations. Only for such one. Otherwise, everything was done in accordance with operational documents available by 1986, so we violated nothing. Anyway, they said so many things about us, so that it gave an impression that we had studied those instructions only to do everything other way around. They said: “Shielding was removed! Violation!”. Really, there was no violation. When I was arrested, I told to investigator right away that there was no violation and pointed an operational instruction section to him. But that was absolutely pointless because “and in the next part of indictment… and sentenced to…”. All goes as violation by personnel. Really, no violations that could not only lead to the explosion but even to reactor shutdown were made by operating personnel on 25th and 26th of April. And there could not be any discussion about reactor explosion if the reactor had been constructed in accordance to the reactor construction guidelines. There. 


After stabilizing of power level at 200 MW, all measurements of turbine vibrations were made, Sasha Akimov reported to me, I gathered all people involved in the experiment and did a last briefing, and everyone spread out to monitor their assigned instruments. At 01:23:04 a turbo generator’s rundown experiment began. This has been recorded by a control system. And everything was going normally. It was very quite in the control room, everyone was quite, we all were observing the ongoing process. I heard some talking. I turned around. Reactor operator Toptunov was saying something to Akimov. They were about 8-10 meters from me, and they were 2-3 meters apart. I didn’t hear what they were talking about. But they were talking calmly. Akimov said: “Shut down the reactor” and gestured with his finger to push a button. I recalled from the briefing that it has been agreed on to immediately shut down the reactor at the beginning of (turbo generator’s) rundown. For some reason Sasha Akimov didn’t give a command to shut down the reactor. But I didn’t find it important then, or after I had studied all readings, that is after the accident, and I still don’t find it important. And pretty much everyone agrees with me. I sent it to “MGT ??” and they also agreed with me that the accident would have happened in the beginning of the experiment even if the button was pressed. The accident happened not because of it, absolutely not because of it. 


After Akimov’s command, Toptunov pressed the button of emergency shielding at 01:23:40. I would like to say that emergency shielding button, that’s how it’s called, is designed to stop the reactor as during the emergency situations as during the most basic conditions. And if before all this everything had been calm… and judging from the conversation between Toptunov and Akimov I understood that there were no questions… because after Akimov had told to shut down the reactor he turned back to his instruments… if there would have been anything alarming he would certainly come to reactor’s control panel… I turned too to observe… and in a few seconds… and from a control system it is clear that it was after 3-4 seconds… emergency and alarming lights started going off… and then at 01:23:46 the reactor exploded. 


Further investigation showed, and now nearly all specialists agree on this, that the reactor was exploded by the emergency shielding. In other words, emergency shielding, that is supposed to stop a reactor during emergency situation – not even mentioning normal ones – in this case acted like a fuse for an atomic bomb. It is paradoxical. It is unbelievable. But it is true. And now nearly all agree about this. Of course, it could be speculated that emergency shielding could not handle some rapidly unfolding process. But to think that an emergency shielding could by itself explode a reactor… that is unthinkable even in the scariest dreams… And here is when the explosion thundered. 


It felt like a powerful impact… shaking of the building… I glanced at the ceiling from which its pieces were falling… and after a second or two another explosion happened… numerous emergency lights were flickering… the light went off for a short period of time after which it came back in the control room… my first thought was that something had happened to deaerators that are located directly above the control room… deaerators are these big vessels partially filled with water and steam… because the explosion was quite powerful, I thought that hot water would pour in from above onto the control panel… I immediately commanded all to go to the backup control panel… However, it all quieted down, and I withdrew my command… Nobody had left by that time yet… Eventually, there were neither water nor steam leaks… I obviously could not have known what had actually happened by that time… Nor could I suspect… Just as a habit, a sort of stereotype, right after an incident you look at instruments’ readings… their signalling… what had happened… And just a brief glance could tell that something horrible had happened… that it is not an ordinary accident, because just diagonally from where I was standing there were instruments indicating pressure in a first circuit – pressure was zero… then I went along the panel, studying the instruments… came to the instruments indicating heat-carrying agent consumption along the active zone – also zero… for a practical person it clearly says catastrophe… because pressure in a first circuit is zero, no heat-carrying agent consumption… it means that heat-emitting elements, i.e. fuel cassettes, are not being cooled… and after a short period of time they will melt down… that is a complete disaster…


However, in this case, fuel had turned into dust in the explosion. But of course, I learned about this only after the explosion. But at that moment I certainly could not imagine that. It was absolutely unclear what had happened, because the accident happened - well we call it an accident, but it is certainly a disaster - the accident happened during such ordinary, mundane circumstances. Nothing had foreshadowed it. There was nothing risky or anything. Everything was normal. And after all that had happened, the investigation showed that the control system did not register even a single emergency or alarming signal in the moment of emergency shielding button pressing. Everything happened in a calm, working, weekday moment. 


Right after the explosion, no one could even imagine what had just happened. While walking along the instruments panel, I reached the reactor control panel. The guys were absolutely confused. What else could they be? There was no other way. If operator presses emergency shielding button that should shut down the reactor in an ordinary calm situation and instead of it he gets an explosion… there can be no other feeling but confusion… I don’t know how I looked at that moment since I could not look at myself. But I remember my feelings. Complete bewilderment. What had just happened? Why? I have already said that the conversation between Toptunov and Akimov was absolutely calm. There was nothing alarming 7 seconds before the explosion. When I looked at the reactor control panel, my hair probably stood on its end… Despite the controlling couplings being powered down by control shielding rods, the rods stood in some intermediary position, lowered down to 2.5-3 meters. Reactimeter, a device that shows reactivity, showed positive number, which means that reactor’s power should be increasing. And certainly, that confused me. Immediately I told Kudryavcev and Proskuryakov to run into the central room and manually lower control rods. As soon as they left, I realized that this decision was stupid, unnecessary, they would not go anyway. I immediately jumped into corridor by they had already vanished. After the accident, I analysed my actions for a thousand of times. And basically, only this command of mine was wrong. That was the moment when I understood that something irreversible had happened. However, what exactly was it and what were we supposed to do – those were unclear. There were no panic among all those people present in the control room – about 13-15 people in total – I didn’t see any of it, as I didn’t see it later among the people maintaining the block. And I must say that on April 26th I didn’t need to repeat my commands twice. Everything was executed, if it was possible to do so. After the accident, the operating personnel did everything possible. Unfortunately, for most of them this ended up being fatal. 


If you want to do something, then you need to know something. Judging by the instruments, the pictured situation was horrible. But it didn’t dictate any information of what to do. I exited the room, went into the corridor, there were dust and smoke, so I came back and told Akimov to turn smoke-removing ventilators on, and using another exit I went to an engine room – the situation was absolutely horrible there… part of the roof had fallen down… concrete plates had been partially destroyed and had damaged the pipelines… hot water was geysering in all directions… steam… short-circuit flashes at powerlines… abrupt loud snaps, like shots… by the 7th turbine, oil pipes had been damaged by fallen concrete slabs... oil caught on fire... some guys were running towards that place... 


I returned to the control room and decided to go up to a central hall, to check on the reactor. However, while passing the corridor, I met central hall operators and gas curcuit operators. Central hall operator Anatoly Kurguz had been horribly burned by steam... pieces of skin were hanging from his face... his hands had been burned as well – skin was in pieces too… obviously, it was unclear what was under his clothes… I told them: “Go to a sanitary department, an ambulance should arrive there soon”… the one that Aleksandar Akimov had called for… He had also called for a fire brigade… But really a fire brigade was already on its way because one of the firemen had been on a street when the explosion happened… And he saw all of it… Gas curcuit operator Simonenko told me that reactor facility had been destroyed... I went a bit further down the corridor, until the tenth mark, and looked out of the window... I saw that reactor facility did not have one of its walls... It had fallen...


Then I went down, to the street, and went around the reactor facility. They were close together – 4th reactor block, chemical facility, 3rd reactor block – they were built as one single building. I went around all of it. It looked horrible… Two walls of reactor facility – west and north – were gone… Roof of the central reactor hall was gone… fallen down… Water was pouring from many places… Flashes of short circuits… Small localized fires on the roofs of the chemical facility and 3rd reactor block. There was no massive fire. Rather numerous localized fires instead. I reached 3rd block, firefighter vehicles were there. I asked one of the drivers who was in charge. He pointed at leutenant Pravik, who was just passing by. I recognized his face but I didn’t know his last name. I told him where he needed to drive in order to connect to a fire hydrant that led towards the roof. He began to turn the vehicles around while I entered the 3rd reactor’s control room. There I asked if anything was hindering this block’s work. Head of block’s shift Baktasyarov Yuri told me that they had checked everything and found no hindrance. So I went back towards the 4th block. 


When I reached central controlling electrical transformer, the one controlling the power grid, deputy chief of energy facility Aleksandar Lechenko was coming from it. Together we went to the 4th block. There I told Lechenko and Akimov to power down all machinery, exhaust hydrogen from the generators and drain oil from the turbines. Because it was impossible to do anything with the reactor, I knew it. For me, from this moment forward, 4th block’s reactor existed solely as a source of danger for located nearby blocks 1, 2 and 3. And it was necessary to take actions to prevent the appearance of new fires. And without a doubt they would start in that situation. That was why the most important things - power down, hydrogen exhaust, oil draining – were necessary to perform as soon as possible. Akimov or Lechenko, together with the operators of a turbine and of course electrical facilities, began working on these tasks. They finished the job. Received heavy injuries. For some it seemed to be fatal. At that time Petya Polomorchuk brought Volodya Sheshenok, engineer from a testing facility. He was in shock, burned by water, and supposedly the pain was overwhelmingly higher than any imaginable thresholds, he could only scarcely move his eyes. But there were no moans, no shoutings, nothing. And when I had passed the corridor I saw medical stretchers there, so I told guys to take those stretchers and bring Sheshenok to the medical facility. Polomorchuk and Anatoly Shevchuk took Sheshenok and carried him away. By the morning Sheshenok was already dead. Later we found out that he was the second victim. The first victim was Hodyumchuk Valery, operator of main circulating pumps. Immedeately after the explosion he was burried under collapsed structures. And who knows where is he, he was never found. He is burried at that block. But back then I didn’t know that, of course. 


Akimov or Lechenko began to do this task, and I went outside since the situation there was alarming. Not all fires had been extinguished yet. Once I saw it, I entered 3rd block once again, ordered Magdasarov to turn off 3rd block’s reactor and went back to the 4th block. There I met with Perevozchenko Valery, head of reactor facility’s shift. He told me that Hodyumchuk wasn’t there. Juvchenko, I and dosimetrist, and Perevozchenko went to VCN hall where Hodyumchuk was supposed to be. We found nothing then. And we found nothing later too. But over there we all were in bad physical condition. When I returned to block’s control room, I lost all my strength, both physical and mental. Because I could not think of any more tasks to perform. Everything that could have been done, all that I deemed possible and doable, we had already done by that time. I could not think of anything else. Probably, because of my physical state, I could not operate normally. Each one of us had already vomited several times by then. There was nothing else to vomit with… except entrails.


The phone rang. Akimov passed me the phone, said that Bryuhanov was calling. Bryuhanov was at civil protection headquarters and he told me to go there. I took a shower, changed my clothes. Took some diagrams with me, 3 of them – of reactor’s power, 1st circuit’s pressure – and went towards civil protection headquarters. Obviously, I could not report anything satisfactory to the director. I put the diagrams down. I said that we had experienced a sudden increase in power, probably, as a result of some fault in emergency shielding operation. This, of course, turned out to be true, but not all of it. But I could not think of anything else at that time. Well really, I was not thinking or even trying to understand anything anymore, because we had a job that had to be done. 


There I felt like vomiting again so I ran outside on the street. I was put in an ambulance and brought to a hospital. My condition was quite terrible, of course. However, after a nurse put me on IV and put one or two bottles of saline solution into me – or whatever that was, I have no idea – miraculously, I didn’t feel like sleeping anymore, I left the room, saw guys talking there too. We gathered in a smoking room and started discussion – How? What? And why? 


And this discussion of how-what-and-why continued in Moscow, where we were brought on April 27th. Well some of us were brought there on April 26th, but the majority was brought there on April 27th. And there I ended up in a hospital for a long half a year. I was let out on November 4th of 1986, came to Kiev. And on December 4th, that is in a month, a was arrested. 


Let’s take a little break. 


Well the arrest wasn’t really a surprise for me. Because when I was in a hospital, an investigator visited me couple of times and questioned me as a witness… yet… However, judging from all that, it was absolutely clear that personnel will be held responsible in all of it. There was no other way – in Soviet Union there were no accidents due to faulty equipment. In Soviet Union accidents could only occur because of working personnel. Dispatcher, operator, service worker – yes. But not because of faulty equipment. I cannot recall such cases, even though I was searching for such. 


Well, why I was arrested and why they would not just let me sign that I wasn’t going to leave… That wasn’t clear to me, really. I wasn’t dangerous for public. By December nearly all the witnesses were questioned. So really there was no way (for me) to affect either the investigation or the witnesses. Well, I was arrested, so be it. At first it wasn’t burdensome for me because during the investigation they aquired some documents previously unknown to me. And based on those documents I realized that, turns out, designers (of the reactor) had long known about these negative properties of the reactor that led to the accident in 1986. Basically, these had been already known 10 years before. Basically, during operation of the 1st block at Leningrad power plant, after the accident in 1975, there had been other suggestions later, unknown to me before. I got familiarized with the documents and the overall picture became completely clear to me by December – of why and how the explosion had happened. And practically I didn’t change my understanding of it after that. Although since that time several reports appeared, post-accident calculations. But they only complimented the picture. It was all clear for me in December of 1986. 


Court hearing was delayed for various reasons - including due to sickness of chief engineer Nikolay Fomin. And in July of 1987 the court hearing for Chernobyl’s criminals was held. That is how it was announced. This court hearing… There could not have been another court hearing. After Science and Technological Council with Aleksandrov as a chairperson had put all blame on operating personnel in June of 1986, governmental committee confirmed that, so to speak, and then politburo (political bureau) released an act.... And which court would go against the collective mind of forever righteous and uncontrollable politburo... It would be naïve to assume. The outcome had already been decided – court’s decision. I just want to say that the judge seemed to completely understand that he was fulfilling a quite direct social order. Because at the court hearing, in presence of technical expert committee, 24 of my questions were declined by the judge. And these questions were addressed towards finding out whether the reactor RBMK 1000 was in accordance with the design regulations in 1986.